one before, when I was half a boy. Everyone talks about snows forty foot deep, and how 
the ice wind comes howling out of the north, but the real enemy is the cold. It steals up 
on you quieter than Will, and at first you shiver and your teeth chatter and you stamp 
your feet and dream of mulled wine and nice hot fires. It burns, it does. Nothing burns 
like the cold. But only for a while. Then it gets inside you and starts to fill you up, and 
after a while you don’t have the strength to fight it. It’s easier just to sit down or go to 
sleep. They say you don’t feel any pain toward the end. First you go weak and drowsy, 
and everything starts to fade, and then it’s like sinking into a sea of warm milk. Peaceful, 
like.”
“Such eloquence, Gared,” Ser Waymar observed. “I never suspected you had it in you.”
“I’ve had the cold in me too, lordling.” Gared pulled back his hood, giving Ser Waymar a 
good long look at the stumps where his ears had been. “Two ears, three toes, and the 
little finger off my left hand. I got off light. We found my brother frozen at his watch, 
with a smile on his face.”
Ser Waymar shrugged. “You ought dress more warmly, Gared.”
Gared glared at the lordling, the scars around his ear holes flushed red with anger where 
Maester Aemon had cut the ears away. “We’ll see how warm you can dress when the 
winter comes.” He pulled up his hood and hunched over his garron, silent and sullen.
“If Gared said it was the cold . . . ” Will began.
“Have you drawn any watches this past week, Will?”
“Yes, m’lord.” There never was a week when he did not draw a dozen bloody watches. 
What was the man driving at?
“And how did you find the Wall?”
“Weeping,” Will said, frowning. He saw it clear enough, now that the lordling had 
pointed it out. “They couldn’t have froze. Not if the Wall was weeping. It wasn’t cold 
enough.”
Royce nodded. “Bright lad. We’ve had a few light frosts this past week, and a quick flurry 
of snow now and then, but surely no cold fierce enough to kill eight grown men. Men 
clad in fur and leather, let me remind you, with shelter near at hand, and the means of 
making fire.” The knight’s smile was cocksure. “Will, lead us there. I would see these 
dead men for myself.”
“Wind. Trees rustling. A wolf. Which sound is it that unmans you so, Gared?” When 
Gared did not answer, Royce slid gracefully from his saddle. He tied the destrier securely 
to a low-hanging limb, well away from the other horses, and drew his longsword from its 
sheath. Jewels glittered in its hilt, and the moonlight ran down the shining steel. It was a 
splendid weapon, castle-forged, and new-made from the look of it. Will doubted it had 
ever been swung in anger.
“The trees press close here,” Will warned. “That sword will tangle you up, m’lord. Better 
a knife.”
“If I need instruction, I will ask for it,” the young lord said. “Gared, stay here. Guard the 
horses.”
Gared dismounted. “We need a fire. I’ll see to it.”
“How big a fool are you, old man? If there are enemies in this wood, a fire is the last 
thing we want.”
“There’s some enemies a fire will keep away,” Gared said. “Bears and direwolves 
and . . . and other things . . . ”
Ser Waymar’s mouth became a hard line. “No fire.”
Gared’s hood shadowed his face, but Will could see the hard glitter in his eyes as he 
stared at the knight. For a moment he was afraid the older man would go for his sword. 
It was a short, ugly thing, its grip discolored by sweat, its edge nicked from hard use, but 
Will would not have given an iron bob for the lordling’s life if Gared pulled it from its 
scabbard.
Finally Gared looked down. “No fire,” he muttered, low under his breath.
Royce took it for acquiescence and turned away. “Lead on,” he said to Will.
Will threaded their way through a thicket, then started up the slope to the low ridge 
where he had found his vantage point under a sentinel tree. Under the thin crust of 
snow, the ground was damp and muddy, slick footing, with rocks and hidden roots to 
trip you up. Will made no sound as he climbed. Behind him, he heard the soft metallic 
slither of the lordling’s ringmail, the rustle of leaves, and muttered curses as reaching 
branches grabbed at his longsword and tugged on his splendid sable cloak.
The great sentinel was right there at the top of the ridge, where Will had known it would 
be, its lowest branches a bare foot off the ground. Will slid in underneath, flat on his 
belly in the snow and the mud, and looked down on the empty clearing below.
His heart stopped in his chest. For a moment he dared not breathe. Moonlight shone 
down on the clearing, the ashes of the firepit, the snow-covered lean-to, the great rock, 
the little half-frozen stream. Everything was just as it had been a few hours ago.
They were gone. All the bodies were gone.
“Gods!” he heard behind him. A sword slashed at a branch as Ser Waymar Royce gained 
the ridge. He stood there beside the sentinel, longsword in hand, his cloak billowing 
behind him as the wind came up, outlined nobly against the stars for all to see.
“Get 
down!
” Will whispered urgently. “Something’s wrong.”
Royce did not move. He looked down at the empty clearing and laughed. “Your dead 
men seem to have moved camp, Will.”
Will’s voice abandoned him. He groped for words that did not come. It was not possible. 
His eyes swept back and forth over the abandoned campsite, stopped on the axe. A huge 
double-bladed battle-axe, still lying where he had seen it last, untouched. A valuable 
weapon . . . 
“On your feet, Will,” Ser Waymar commanded. “There’s no one here. I won’t have you 
hiding under a bush.”
Reluctantly, Will obeyed.
Ser Waymar looked him over with open disapproval. “I am not going back to Castle 
Black a failure on my first ranging. We 
will
 find these men.” He glanced around. “Up the 
tree. Be quick about it. Look for a fire.”
Will turned away, wordless. There was no use to argue. The wind was moving. It cut 
right through him. He went to the tree, a vaulting grey-green sentinel, and began to 
climb. Soon his hands were sticky with sap, and he was lost among the needles. Fear 
filled his gut like a meal he could not digest. He whispered a prayer to the nameless gods 
of the wood, and slipped his dirk free of its sheath. He put it between his teeth to keep 
both hands free for climbing. The taste of cold iron in his mouth gave him comfort.
Down below, the lordling called out suddenly, “Who goes there?” Will heard uncertainty 
in the challenge. He stopped climbing; he listened; he watched.
The woods gave answer: the rustle of leaves, the icy rush of the stream, a distant hoot of 
a snow owl.
The Others made no sound.
Will saw movement from the corner of his eye. Pale shapes gliding through the wood. He 
turned his head, glimpsed a white shadow in the darkness. Then it was gone. Branches 
stirred gently in the wind, scratching at one another with wooden fingers. Will opened 
his mouth to call down a warning, and the words seemed to freeze in his throat. Perhaps 
he was wrong. Perhaps it had only been a bird, a reflection on the snow, some trick of 
the moonlight. What had he seen, after all?
“Will, where are you?” Ser Waymar called up. “Can you see anything?” He was turning in 
a slow circle, suddenly wary, his sword in hand. He must have felt them, as Will felt 
them. There was nothing to see. “Answer me! Why is it so cold?”
It 
was
 cold. Shivering, Will clung more tightly to his perch. His face pressed hard 
against the trunk of the sentinel. He could feel the sweet, sticky sap on his cheek.
A shadow emerged from the dark of the wood. It stood in front of Royce. Tall, it was, and 
gaunt and hard as old bones, with flesh pale as milk. Its armor seemed to change color as 
it moved; here it was white as new-fallen snow, there black as shadow, everywhere 
dappled with the deep grey-green of the trees. The patterns ran like moonlight on water 
with every step it took.
Will heard the breath go out of Ser Waymar Royce in a long hiss. “Come no farther,” the 
lordling warned. His voice cracked like a boy’s. He threw the long sable cloak back over 
his shoulders, to free his arms for battle, and took his sword in both hands. The wind 
had stopped. It was very cold.
The Other slid forward on silent feet. In its hand was a longsword like none that Will had 
ever seen. No human metal had gone into the forging of that blade. It was alive with 
moonlight, translucent, a shard of crystal so thin that it seemed almost to vanish when 
seen edge-on. There was a faint blue shimmer to the thing, a ghost-light that played 
around its edges, and somehow Will knew it was sharper than any razor.
Ser Waymar met him bravely. “Dance with me then.” He lifted his sword high over his 
head, defiant. His hands trembled from the weight of it, or perhaps from the cold. Yet in 
that moment, Will thought, he was a boy no longer, but a man of the Night’s Watch.
The Other halted. Will saw its eyes; blue, deeper and bluer than any human eyes, a blue 
that burned like ice. They fixed on the longsword trembling on high, watched the 
moonlight running cold along the metal. For a heartbeat he dared to hope.
They emerged silently from the shadows, twins to the first. Three of 
them . . . four . . . five . . . Ser Waymar may have felt the cold that came with them, but he 
never saw them, never heard them. Will had to call out. It was his duty. And his death, if 
he did. He shivered, and hugged the tree, and kept the silence.
The pale sword came shivering through the air.
Ser Waymar met it with steel. When the blades met, there was no ring of metal on metal; 
only a high, thin sound at the edge of hearing, like an animal screaming in pain. Royce 
checked a second blow, and a third, then fell back a step. Another flurry of blows, and he 
fell back again.
Behind him, to right, to left, all around him, the watchers stood patient, faceless, silent, 
the shifting patterns of their delicate armor making them all but invisible in the wood. 
Yet they made no move to interfere.
Again and again the swords met, until Will wanted to cover his ears against the strange 
anguished keening of their clash. Ser Waymar was panting from the effort now, his 
breath steaming in the moonlight. His blade was white with frost; the Other’s danced 
with pale blue light.
Then Royce’s parry came a beat too late. The pale sword bit through the ringmail 
beneath his arm. The young lord cried out in pain. Blood welled between the rings. It 
steamed in the cold, and the droplets seemed red as fire where they touched the snow. 
Ser Waymar’s fingers brushed his side. His moleskin glove came away soaked with red.
The Other said something in a language that Will did not know; his voice was like the 
cracking of ice on a winter lake, and the words were mocking.
Ser Waymar Royce found his fury. “For Robert!” he shouted, and he came up snarling, 
lifting the frost-covered longsword with both hands and swinging it around in a flat 
sidearm slash with all his weight behind it. The Other’s parry was almost lazy.
When the blades touched, the steel shattered.
A scream echoed through the forest night, and the longsword shivered into a hundred 
brittle pieces, the shards scattering like a rain of needles. Royce went to his knees, 
shrieking, and covered his eyes. Blood welled between his fingers.
The watchers moved forward together, as if some signal had been given. Swords rose 
and fell, all in a deathly silence. It was cold butchery. The pale blades sliced through 
ringmail as if it were silk. Will closed his eyes. Far beneath him, he heard their voices 
and laughter sharp as icicles.
When he found the courage to look again, a long time had passed, and the ridge below 
was empty.
He stayed in the tree, scarce daring to breathe, while the moon crept slowly across the 
black sky. Finally, his muscles cramping and his fingers numb with cold, he climbed 
down.
Royce’s body lay facedown in the snow, one arm outflung. The thick sable cloak had 
been slashed in a dozen places. Lying dead like that, you saw how young he was. A boy.
He found what was left of the sword a few feet away, the end splintered and twisted like 
a tree struck by lightning. Will knelt, looked around warily, and snatched it up. The 
broken sword would be his proof. Gared would know what to make of it, and if not him, 
then surely that old bear Mormont or Maester Aemon. Would Gared still be waiting with 
the horses? He had to hurry.
Will rose. Ser Waymar Royce stood over him.
His fine clothes were a tatter, his face a ruin. A shard from his sword transfixed the blind 
white pupil of his left eye.
The right eye was open. The pupil burned blue. It saw.
The broken sword fell from nerveless fingers. Will closed his eyes to pray. Long, elegant 
hands brushed his cheek, then tightened around his throat. They were gloved in the 
finest moleskin and sticky with blood, yet the touch was icy cold.

BRAN
The morning had dawned clear and cold, with a crispness that hinted at the end of 
summer. They set forth at daybreak to see a man beheaded, twenty in all, and Bran rode 
among them, nervous with excitement. This was the first time he had been deemed old 
enough to go with his lord father and his brothers to see the king’s justice done. It was 
the ninth year of summer, and the seventh of Bran’s life.
The man had been taken outside a small holdfast in the hills. Robb thought he was a 
wildling, his sword sworn to Mance Rayder, the King-beyond-the-Wall. It made Bran’s 
skin prickle to think of it. He remembered the hearth tales Old Nan told them. The 
wildlings were cruel men, she said, slavers and slayers and thieves. They consorted with 
giants and ghouls, stole girl children in the dead of night, and drank blood from polished 
horns. And their women lay with the Others in the Long Night to sire terrible half-
human children.
But the man they found bound hand and foot to the holdfast wall awaiting the king’s 
justice was old and scrawny, not much taller than Robb. He had lost both ears and a 
finger to frostbite, and he dressed all in black, the same as a brother of the Night’s 
Watch, except that his furs were ragged and greasy.
The breath of man and horse mingled, steaming, in the cold morning air as his lord 
father had the man cut down from the wall and dragged before them. Robb and Jon sat 
tall and still on their horses, with Bran between them on his pony, trying to seem older 
than seven, trying to pretend that he’d seen all this before. A faint wind blew through the 
holdfast gate. Over their heads flapped the banner of the Starks of Winterfell: a grey 
direwolf racing across an ice-white field
